The scrap must be layered in the bucket according to size and density to promote the rapid formation of a liquid pool of steel in the hearth while providing protection for the sidewalls and roof from the radiation of the electric arc. Operators must prevent scrap cave-ins that damage electrodes and avoid placing heavy pieces directly before burner ports to prevent flame blowback. Modern furnaces aim for minimal back-charges (2-3 buckets per heat or single-bucket operation) to reduce dead time. Approximately 10-20 kWh/ton of energy is lost every time the furnace roof is opened.

Initial melting uses intermediate voltage taps until the electrodes bore into the scrap. Approximately 15% of material melts during bore-in within minutes. Once sufficient penetration occurs, a long arc (high voltage) tap is used without fear of radiation damage to the roof. The long arc maximizes the transfer of power to the scrap and a liquid pool of steel is formed in the furnace hearth.

Phosphorus retention in the slag depends on the bath temperature, slag basicity and FeO levels in the slag. At higher temperature or low FeO levels, P reverts from the slag back into the bath. P removal is usually carried out in the heat as early as possible. The hot heel approach proves beneficial because O2 can be lanced into the bath while its temperature is quite low. In the beginning of heat, the slag also contains high FeO level which is carried over from the previous heat thus aids in the removal of P. Operators should employ high slag basicity (CaO/SiO2 ratio) but avoid oversaturation since excessive lime increases slag viscosity and reduces effectiveness. The partition of P in the slag to P in the bath ranges usually from 5 to 15. Generally P is reduced by 20% to 50% in the EAF.

Sulphur is removed mainly as a sulphide dissolved in the slag. S partition between the slag and metal is dependent on slag chemistry and is favored at low steel oxidation levels. Removal of S in the EAF is difficult especially in the modern practice where the oxidation level of the bath is quite high. Generally the partition ratio is between 3 to 5 in EAF operations. For reducing conditions where the bath has a much lower O2 activity, distribution ratios for S of between 20 and 100 can be achieved.

N2 levels in steel as low as 50 ppm can be achieved in the furnace prior to tapping. Bottom tapping is beneficial for maintaining low N2 levels because tapping is fast and a tight tap stream is maintained. A high O2 potential in the steel is beneficial for low N2 levels and the heat should be tapped open as opposed to killing the heat. At 1600 deg C, the maximum solubility of N2 in pure Fe is 450 ppm. Typically, the N2 levels in the steel at tapping ranges around 80 to 100 ppm.

Decarburization is also beneficial for the removal of H2. It has been shown that decarburizing at a rate of 1% per hour can lower H2 levels in the steel from 8 ppm down to 2 ppm in 10 minutes.

Once the desired steel composition and temperature have been achieved in the furnace, the tap hole is opened, the furnace is tilted, and the steel is poured into a teeming ladle for transfer to the secondary steel making unit. During the tapping process, ferro alloy additions are made based on the bath analysis and the desired steel grade. Deoxidizing agents are added to the steel to lower the O2 content prior to further processing. Common deoxidizers are Al, ferrosilicon and silico manganese. While making C steel heats a minimum of slag carry over is aimed. A new slag cover is built during tapping. For ladle furnace operations, a calcium aluminate slag is a good choice for the control of S.
